---
toc: false
layout: post
description: On the existence of an escape velocity for projects
categories: [markdown]
title: Projects are rockets
---

# On the existence of an escape velocity for projects
I work for the innovation department of my employer. For a long time, we have had a space rocket as our symbol. Of course, the rocket stands for a piece of advanced technology, and symbolizes exploration into the unknown. However, I have come to believe there are more practical reasons that it is a good symbol. I will explain in what follows.

For the past two years, we have been working on a project involving the automatic categorizing of incoming mail. In the current situation, this is done by hand: someone has to read all the letters that come in, and put them in the right basket. Of course, with machine learning this is a piece of cake: our archive of letters with their categorization is massive, so we have very good data [1].  
The problem is, all this is very very new for our very very conservative company: not only is the paradigm of machine learning new, all the surrounding infrastructure is as well. This creates significant obstacles to the completion of the project. Additionally, the company has a rather vague responsibility structure: at the outset of a project it is often not clear who the key stakeholders are and what their role is. Any such stakeholder can and often will provide a block for the project until they are properly informed, as is their job [2]. This leads to spending much of the time "stakeholder searching": looking for people you need to inform, and trying to have them all on board with the project. This tends to take a long time.  
A problem appears because people change jobs or roles, and the organization changes. It turns the set of key stakeholders in a moving target. The people that were key in the beginning are not so key now, and you have to engage in more stakeholder searching to replace them. And once you've found and informed those stakeholders, you find a new set of people that need to be informed, and so on.    
This dynamic revealed itself to me today when I read an email from someone I didn't know was a stakeholder, containing questions about the validity of the project [3]. At this point, we're already working out the implementation details: the infrastructure, API's, and architecture all have been finalized. This was someone I knew already, but they changed roles recently, leading to them being a new stakeholder. It's been like this much of the project: we make some progress, then find out someone has to be informed and take a decision, we spend some time to get them on board, then we find out someone else needs to be informed, etc. etc.

So what does this have to do with rockets? We might consider the need to find stakeholders as a sort of gravitational pull: if you don't find them fast enough, you will always be looking for the next set, instead of finishing your project. What we want is for the project to reach escape velocity: we find and inform stakeholders sufficiently fast that the project is no longer limited by the gravitational pull, and can shoot off into space, to explore the expanses beyond. 



**Footnotes**

1. The veracity of this statement was borne out by the very first model I trained. It had an accuracy of about 96% with about 20 possible classifications. When I went to check the misclassifications to improve the model, I discovered groups that had been *incorrectly labeled* rather than incorrectly classified.
2. And they are doing their job well! They have key decisions to make, and should be well-informed before they take those.
3. To reiterate footnote 2, meaning he was doing his job well!
